
* A Project Gutenberg Canada Ebook *

This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few
restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make
a change in the ebook (other than alteration for different
display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use of
the ebook. If either of these conditions applies, please
check gutenberg.ca/links/licence.html before proceeding.

This work is in the Canadian public domain, but may be
under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada,
check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER
COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD
OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE.

Title: The King of the Cats
   [The third story in Benét's 1937 collection
   Thirteen O'Clock: Stories of Several Worlds]
Author: Benét, Stephen Vincent (1898-1943)
Date of first publication: 1937
Edition used as base for this ebook:
   New York and Toronto: Farrar & Rinehart, 1937
Date first posted: 4 February 2011
Date last updated: 4 February 2011
Project Gutenberg Canada ebook #715

This ebook was produced by
Barbara Watson, Mark Akrigg
& the Online Distributed Proofreading Canada Team
at http://www.pgdpcanada.net






THE KING OF THE CATS

by Stephen Vincent Benét


"But, my _dear_," said Mrs. Culverin, with a tiny gasp, "you can't
actually mean--a _tail_!"

Mrs. Dingle nodded impressively. "Exactly. I've seen him. Twice. Paris,
of course, and then, a command appearance at Rome--we were in the Royal
box. He conducted--my clear, you've never heard such effects from an
orchestra--and, my dear," she hesitated slightly, "he conducted _with
it_."

"How perfectly, fascinatingly too horrid for words!" said Mrs. Culverin
in a dazed but greedy voice. "We _must_ have him to dinner as soon as he
comes over--he is coming over, isn't he?"

"The twelfth," said Mrs. Dingle with a gleam in her eyes. "The New
Symphony people have asked him to be guest-conductor for three special
concerts--I do hope you can dine with _us_ some night while he's
here--he'll be very busy, of course--but he's promised to give us what
time he can spare----"

"Oh, thank you, dear," said Mrs. Culverin, abstractedly, her last raid
upon Mrs. Dingle's pet British novelist still fresh in her mind. "You're
always so delightfully hospitable--but you mustn't wear yourself
out--the rest of us must do _our_ part--I know Henry and myself would be
only too glad to----"

"That's very sweet of you, darling." Mrs. Dingle also remembered the
larceny of the British novelist. "But we're just going to give Monsieur
Tibault--sweet name, isn't it! They say he's descended from the Tybalt
in 'Romeo and Juliet' and that's why he doesn't like Shakespeare--we're
just going to give Monsieur Tibault the simplest sort of time--a little
reception after his first concert, perhaps. He hates," she looked around
the table, "large, mixed parties. And then, of course, his--er--little
idiosyncrasy----" she coughed delicately. "It makes him feel a trifle
shy with strangers."

"But I don't understand yet, Aunt Emily," said Tommy Brooks, Mrs.
Dingle's nephew. "Do you really mean this Tibault bozo has a tail? Like
a monkey and everything?"

"Tommy dear," said Mrs. Culverin, crushingly, "in the first place
Monsieur Tibault is not a bozo--he is a very distinguished musician--the
finest conductor in Europe. And in the second place----"

"He has," Mrs. Dingle was firm. "He has a tail. He conducts with it."

"Oh, but honestly!" said Tommy, his ears pinkening. "I mean--of course,
if you say so, Aunt Emily, I'm sure he has--but still, it sounds pretty
steep, if you know what I mean! How about it, Professor Tatto?"

Professor Tatto cleared his throat. "Tck," he said, putting his
fingertips together cautiously, "I shall be very anxious to see this
Monsieur Tibault. For myself, I have never observed a genuine specimen
of _homo caudatus_, so I should be inclined to doubt, and yet . . . In
the Middle Ages, for instance, the belief in men--er--tailed or with
caudal appendages of some sort, was both widespread and, as far as we
can gather, well-founded. As late as the Eighteenth Century, a Dutch
sea-captain with some character for veracity recounts the discovery of a
pair of such creatures in the island of Formosa. They were in a low
state of civilization, I believe, but the appendages in question were
quite distinct. And in 1860, Dr. Grimbrook, the English surgeon, claims
to have treated no less than three African natives with short but
evident tails--though his testimony rests upon his unsupported word.
After all, the thing is not impossible, though doubtless unusual. Web
feet--rudimentary gills--these occur with some frequency. The appendix
we have with us always. The chain of our descent from the ape-like form
is by no means complete. For that matter," he beamed around the table,
"what can we call the last few vertebrae of the normal spine but the
beginnings of a concealed and rudimentary tail? Oh, yes--yes--it's
possible--quite--that in an extraordinary case--a reversion to type--a
survival--though, of course----"

"I told you so," said Mrs. Dingle triumphantly. "_Isn't_ it fascinating?
Isn't it, Princess?"

The Princess Vivrakanarda's eyes, blue as a field of larkspur,
fathomless as the centre of heaven, rested lightly for a moment on Mrs.
Dingle's excited countenance.

"Ve-ry fascinating," she said, in a voice like stroked, golden velvet.
"I should like--I should like ve-ry much to meet this Monsieur Tibault."

"Well, _I_ hope he breaks his neck!" said Tommy Brooks, under his
breath--but nobody ever paid much attention to Tommy.

Nevertheless as the time for Mr. Tibault's arrival in these States drew
nearer and nearer, people in general began to wonder whether the
Princess had spoken quite truthfully--for there was no doubt of the fact
that, up till then, she had been the unique sensation of the season--and
you know what social lions and lionesses are.

It was, if you remember, a Siamese season, and genuine Siamese were at
quite as much of a premium as Russian accents had been in the quaint old
days when the Chauve-Souris was a novelty. The Siamese Art Theatre,
imported at terrific expense, was playing to packed houses.
"Gushuptzgu," an epic novel of Siamese farm life, in nineteen
closely-printed volumes, had just been awarded the Nobel prize.
Prominent pet-and-newt dealers reported no cessation in the appalling
demand for Siamese cats. And upon the crest of this wave of interest in
things Siamese, the Princess Vivrakanarda poised with the elegant
nonchalance of a Hawaiian water-baby upon its surfboard. She was
indispensable. She was incomparable. She was everywhere.

Youthful, enormously wealthy, allied on one hand to the Royal Family of
Siam and on the other to the Cabots (and yet with the first eighteen of
her twenty-one years shrouded from speculation in a golden zone of
mystery), the mingling of races in her had produced an exotic beauty as
distinguished as it was strange. She moved with a feline, effortless
grace, and her skin was as if it had been gently powdered with tiny
grains of the purest gold--yet the blueness of her eyes, set just a
trifle slantingly, was as pure and startling as the sea on the rocks of
Maine. Her brown hair fell to her knees--she had been offered
extraordinary sums by the Master Barbers' Protective Association to
have it shingled. Straight as a waterfall tumbling over brown rocks, it
had a vague perfume of sandalwood and suave spices and held tints of
rust and the sun. She did not talk very much--but then she did not have
to--her voice had an odd, small, melodious huskiness that haunted the
mind. She lived alone and was reputed to be very lazy--at least it was
known that she slept during most of the day--but at night she bloomed
like a moon-flower and a depth came into her eyes.

It was no wonder that Tommy Brooks fell in love with her. The wonder was
that she let him. There was nothing exotic or distinguished about
Tommy--he was just one of those pleasant, normal young men who seem
created to carry on the bond business by reading the newspapers in the
University Club during most of the day, and can always be relied upon at
night to fill an unexpected hole in a dinner-party. It is true that the
Princess could hardly be said to do more than tolerate any of her
suitors--no one had ever seen those aloofly arrogant eyes enliven at the
entrance of any male. But she seemed to be able to tolerate Tommy a
little more than the rest--and that young man's infatuated day-dreams
were beginning to be beset by smart solitaires and imaginary apartments
on Park Avenue, when the famous M. Tibault conducted his first concert
at Carnegie Hall.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Tommy Brooks sat beside the Princess. The eyes he turned upon her were
eyes of longing and love, but her face was as impassive as a mask, and
the only remark she made during the preliminary bustlings was that
there seemed to be a number of people in the audience. But Tommy was
relieved, if anything, to find her even a little more aloof than usual,
for, ever since Mrs. Culverin's dinner-party, a vague disquiet as to the
possible impression which this Tibault creature might make upon her had
been growing in his mind. It shows his devotion that he was present at
all. To a man whose simple Princetonian nature found in "Just a Little
Love, a Little Kiss," the quintessence of musical art, the average
symphony was a positive torture, and he looked forward to the evening's
programme itself with a grim, brave smile.

"Ssh!" said Mrs. Dingle, breathlessly. "He's coming!" It seemed to the
startled Tommy as if he were suddenly back in the trenches under a heavy
barrage, as M. Tibault made his entrance to a perfect bombardment of
applause.

Then the enthusiastic noise was sliced off in the middle and a gasp took
its place--a vast, windy sigh, as if every person in that multitude had
suddenly said, "Ah." For the papers had not lied about him. The tail was
there.

They called him theatric--but how well he understood the uses of
theatricalism! Dressed in unrelieved black from head to foot (the black
dress-shirt had been a special token of Mussolini's esteem), he did not
walk on, he strolled, leisurely, easily, aloofly, the famous tail curled
nonchalantly about one wrist--a suave, black panther lounging through a
summer garden with that little mysterious weave of the head that
panthers have when they pad behind bars--the glittering darkness of his
eyes unmoved by any surprise or elation. He nodded, twice, in regal
acknowledgment, as the clapping reached an apogee of frenzy. To Tommy
there was something dreadfully reminiscent of the Princess in the way he
nodded. Then he turned to his orchestra.

A second and louder gasp went up from the audience at this point, for,
as he turned, the tip of that incredible tail twined with dainty
carelessness into some hidden pocket and produced a black baton. But
Tommy did not even notice. He was looking at the Princess instead.

She had not even bothered to clap, at first, but now--He had never seen
her moved like this, never. She was not applauding, her hands were
clenched in her lap, but her whole body was rigid, rigid as a steel bar,
and the blue flowers of her eyes were bent upon the figure of M. Tibault
in a terrible concentration. The pose of her entire figure was so still
and intense that for an instant Tommy had the lunatic idea that any
moment she might leap from her seat beside him as lightly as a moth, and
land, with no sound, at M. Tibault's side to--yes--to rub her proud head
against his coat in worship. Even Mrs. Dingle would notice in a moment.

"Princess----" he said, in a horrified whisper, "Princess----"

Slowly the tenseness of her body relaxed, her eyes veiled again, she
grew calm.

"Yes, Tommy?" she said, in her usual voice, but there was still
something about her . . .

"Nothing, only--oh, hang--he's starting!" said Tommy, as M. Tibault, his
hands loosely clasped before him, turned and _faced_ the audience. His
eyes dropped, his tail switched once impressively, then gave three
little preliminary taps with his baton on the floor.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Seldom has Gluck's overture to "Iphigenie in Aulis" received such an
ovation. But it was not until the Eighth Symphony that the hysteria of
the audience reached its climax. Never before had the New Symphony
played so superbly--and certainly never before had it been led with such
genius. Three prominent conductors in the audience were sobbing with the
despairing admiration of envious children toward the close, and one at
least was heard to offer wildly ten thousand dollars to a well-known
facial surgeon there present for a shred of evidence that tails of some
variety could by any stretch of science be grafted upon a normally
decaudate form. There was no doubt about it--no mortal hand and arm, be
they ever so dexterous, could combine the delicate elan and powerful
grace displayed in every gesture of M. Tibault's tail.

A sable staff, it dominated the brasses like a flicker of black
lightning; an ebon, elusive whip, it drew the last exquisite breath of
melody from the woodwinds and ruled the stormy strings like a magician's
rod. M. Tibault bowed and bowed again--roar after roar of frenzied
admiration shook the hall to its foundations--and when he finally
staggered, exhausted, from the platform, the president of the Wednesday
Sonata Club was only restrained by force from flinging her
ninety-thousand-dollar string of pearls after him in an excess of
aesthetic appreciation. New York had come and seen--and New York was
conquered. Mrs. Dingle was immediately besieged by reporters, and Tommy
Brooks looked forward to the "little party" at which he was to meet the
new hero of the hour with feelings only a little less lugubrious than
those that would have come to him just before taking his seat in the
electric chair.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The meeting between his Princess and M. Tibault was worse and better
than he expected. Better because, after all, they did not say much to
each other--and worse because it seemed to him, somehow, that some
curious kinship of mind between them made words unnecessary. They were
certainly the most distinguished-looking couple in the room, as he bent
over her hand. "So darlingly foreign, both of them, and yet so
different," babbled Mrs. Dingle--but Tommy couldn't agree.

They were different, yes--the dark, lithe stranger with the bizarre
appendage tucked carelessly in his pocket, and the blue-eyed,
brown-haired girl. But that difference only accentuated what they had in
common--something in the way they moved, in the suavity of their
gestures, in the set of their eyes. Something deeper, even, than race.
He tried to puzzle it out--then, looking around at the others, he had a
flash of revelation. It was as if that couple were foreign, indeed--not
only to New York but to all common humanity. As if they were polite
guests from a different star.

Tommy did not have a very happy evening, on the whole. But his mind
worked slowly, and it was not until much later that the mad suspicion
came upon him in full force.

Perhaps he is not to be blamed for his lack of immediate comprehension.
The next few weeks were weeks of bewildered misery for him. It was not
that the Princess's attitude toward him had changed--she was just as
tolerant of him as before, but M. Tibault was always there. He had a
faculty of appearing as out of thin air--he walked, for all his height,
as lightly as a butterfly--and Tommy grew to hate that faintest shuffle
on the carpet that announced his presence.

And then, hang it all, the man was so smooth, so infernally, unrufflably
smooth! He was never out of temper, never embarrassed. He treated Tommy
with the extreme of urbanity, and yet his eyes mocked, deep-down, and
Tommy could do nothing. And, gradually, the Princess became more and
more drawn to this stranger, in a soundless communion that found little
need for speech--and that, too, Tommy saw and hated, and that, too, he
could not mend.

He began to be haunted not only by M. Tibault in the flesh, but by M.
Tibault in the spirit. He slept badly, and when he slept, he dreamed--of
M. Tibault, a man no longer, but a shadow, a spectre, the limber ghost
of an animal whose words came purringly between sharp little pointed
teeth. There was certainly something odd about the whole shape of the
fellow--his fluid ease, the mould of his head, even the cut of his
fingernails--but just what it was escaped Tommy's intensest cogitation.
And when he did put his finger on it at length, at first he refused to
believe.

A pair of petty incidents decided him, finally, against all reason. He
had gone to Mrs. Dingle's, one winter afternoon, hoping to find the
Princess. She was out with his aunt, but was expected back for tea, and
he wandered idly into the library to wait. He was just about to switch
on the lights, for the library was always dark even in summer, when he
heard a sound of light breathing that seemed to come from the leather
couch in the corner. He approached it cautiously and dimly made out the
form of M. Tibault, curled up on the couch, peacefully asleep.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The sight annoyed Tommy so that he swore under his breath and was back
near the door on his way out, when the feeling we all know and hate, the
feeling that eyes we cannot see are watching us, arrested him. He turned
back--M. Tibault had not moved a muscle of his body to all
appearance--but his eyes were open now. And those eyes were black and
human no longer. They were green--Tommy could have sworn it--and he
could have sworn that they had no bottom and gleamed like little
emeralds in the dark. It only lasted a moment, for Tommy pressed the
light-button automatically--and there was M. Tibault, his normal self,
yawning a little but urbanely apologetic, but it gave Tommy time to
think. Nor did what happened a trifle later increase his peace of mind.

They had lit a fire and were talking in front of it--by now Tommy hated
M. Tibault so thoroughly that he felt that odd yearning for his company
that often occurs in such cases. M. Tibault was telling some anecdote
and Tommy was hating him worse than ever for basking with such obvious
enjoyment in the heat of the flames and the ripple of his own voice.

Then they heard the street-door open, and M. Tibault jumped up--and
jumping, caught one sock on a sharp corner of the brass fire-rail and
tore it open in a jagged flap. Tommy looked down mechanically at the
tear--a second's glance, but enough--for M. Tibault, for the first time
in Tommy's experience, lost his temper completely. He swore violently in
some spitting, foreign tongue--his face distorted suddenly--he clapped
his hand over his sock. Then, glaring furiously at Tommy, he fairly
sprang from the room, and Tommy could hear him scaling the stairs in
long, agile bounds.

Tommy sank into a chair, careless for once of the fact that he heard the
Princess's light laugh in the hall. He didn't want to see the Princess.
He didn't want to see anybody. There had been something revealed when M.
Tibault had torn that hole in his sock--and it was not the skin of a
man. Tommy had caught a glimpse of--black plush. Black velvet. And then
had come M. Tibault's sudden explosion of fury. Good _Lord_--did the man
wear black velvet stockings under his ordinary socks? Or could he--could
he--but here Tommy held his fevered head in his hands.

                  *       *       *       *       *

He went to Professor Tatto that evening with a series of hypothetical
questions, but as he did not dare confide his real suspicions to the
Professor, the hypothetical answers he received served only to confuse
him the more. Then he thought of Billy Strange. Billy was a good sort,
and his mind had a turn for the bizarre. Billy might be able to help.

He couldn't get hold of Billy for three days and lived through the
interval in a fever of impatience. But finally they had dinner together
at Billy's apartment, where his queer books were, and Tommy was able to
blurt out the whole disordered jumble of his suspicions.

Billy listened without interrupting until Tommy was quite through. Then
he pulled at his pipe. "But, my dear _man_----" he said, protestingly.

"Oh, I know--I know----" said Tommy, and waved his hands, "I know I'm
crazy--you needn't tell me that--but I tell you, the man's a cat all the
same--no, I don't see how he could be, but he is--why, hang it, in the
first place, everybody knows he's got a tail!"

"Even so," said Billy, puffing. "Oh, my dear Tommy, I don't doubt you
saw, or think you saw, everything you say. But, even so----" He shook
his head.

"But what about those other birds, werwolves and things?" said Tommy.

Billy looked dubious. "We-ll," he admitted, "you've got me there, of
course. At least--a tailed man _is_ possible. And the yarns about
werwolves go back far enough, so that--well, I wouldn't say there aren't
or haven't been werwolves--but then I'm willing to believe more things
than most people. But a wer-cat--or a man that's a cat and a cat that's
a man--honestly, Tommy----"

"If I don't get some real advice I'll go clean off my hinge. For
Heaven's sake, tell me something to _do_!"

"Lemme think," said Billy. "First, you're pizen-sure this man is----"

"A cat. Yeah," and Tommy nodded violently.

"Check. And second--if it doesn't hurt your feelings, Tommy--you're
afraid this girl you're in love with has--er--at least a streak
of--felinity--in her--and so she's drawn to him?"

"Oh, Lord, Billy, if I only knew!"

"Well--er--suppose she really is, too, you know--would you still be keen
on her?"

"I'd marry her if she turned into a dragon every Wednesday!" said Tommy,
fervently.

Billy smiled. "H'm," he said, "then the obvious thing to do is to get
rid of this M. Tibault. Lemme think."

He thought about two pipes full, while Tommy sat on pins and needles.
Then, finally, he burst out laughing.

"What's so darn funny?" said Tommy, aggrievedly.

"Nothing, Tommy, only I've just thought of a stunt--something so
blooming crazy--but if he is--h'm--what you think he is--it _might_
work----" And, going to the bookcase, he took down a book.

"If you think you're going to quiet my nerves by reading me a bedtime
story----"

"Shut up, Tommy, and listen to this--if you really want to get rid of
your feline friend."

"What is it?"

"Book of Agnes Repplier's. About cats. Listen.

"'There is also a Scandinavian version of the ever famous story which
Sir Walter Scott told to Washington Irving, which Monk Lewis told to
Shelley and which, in one form or another, we find embodied in the
folklore of every land'--now, Tommy, pay attention--'the story of the
traveller who saw within a ruined abbey, a procession of cats, lowering
into a grave a little coffin with a crown upon it. Filled with horror,
he hastened from the spot; but when he had reached his destination, he
could not forbear relating to a friend the wonder he had seen. Scarcely
had the tale been told when his friend's cat, who lay curled up
tranquilly by the fire, sprang to its feet, cried out, "Then I am the
King of the Cats!" and disappeared in a flash up the chimney.'

"Well?" said Billy, shutting the book.

"By gum!" said Tommy, staring. "By gum! Do you think there's a chance?"

"_I_ think we're both in the booby-hatch. But if you want to try it----"

"Try it! I'll spring it on him the next time I see him. But--listen--I
can't make it a ruined abbey----"

"Oh, use your imagination! Make it Central Park--anywhere. Tell it as if
it happened to you--seeing the funeral procession and all that. You can
lead into it somehow--let's see--some general line--oh, yes--'Strange,
isn't it, how fact so often copies fiction. Why, only yesterday----'
See?"

"Strange, isn't it, how fact so often copies fiction," repeated Tommy
dutifully. "Why, only yesterday----"

"I happened to be strolling through Central Park when I saw something
very odd."

"I happened to be strolling through--here, gimme that book!" said Tommy,
"I want to learn the rest of it by heart!"

                  *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Dingle's farewell dinner to the famous Monsieur Tibault, on the
occasion of his departure for his Western tour, was looked forward to
with the greatest expectations. Not only would everybody be there,
including the Princess Vivrakanarda, but Mrs. Dingle, a hinter if there
ever was one, had let it be known that at this dinner an announcement of
very unusual interest to Society might be made. So everyone, for once,
was almost on time, except for Tommy. He was at least fifteen minutes
early, for he wanted to have speech with his aunt alone. Unfortunately,
however, he had hardly taken off his overcoat when she was whispering
some news in his ear so rapidly that he found it difficult to understand
a word of it.

"And you mustn't breathe it to a soul!" she ended, beaming. "That is,
not before the announcement--I think we'll have _that_ with the
salad--people never pay very much attention to salad----"

"Breathe what, Aunt Emily?" said Tommy, confused.

"The Princess, darling--the dear Princess and Monsieur Tibault--they
just got engaged this afternoon, dear things! Isn't it _fascinating_?"

"Yeah," said Tommy, and started to walk blindly through the nearest
door. His aunt restrained him.

"Not there, dear--not in the library. You can congratulate them later.
They're just having a sweet little moment alone there now----" And she
turned away to harry the butler, leaving Tommy stunned.

But his chin came up after a moment. He wasn't beaten yet.

"Strange, isn't it, how often fact copies fiction?" he repeated to
himself in dull mnemonics, and, as he did so, he shook his fist at the
library door.

Mrs. Dingle was wrong, as usual. The Princess and M. Tibault were not in
the library--they were in the conservatory, as Tommy discovered when he
wandered aimlessly past the glass doors.

He didn't mean to look, and after a second he turned away. But that
second was enough.

Tibault was seated in a chair and she was crouched on a stool at his
side, while his hand, softly, smoothly, stroked her brown hair. Black
cat and Siamese kitten. Her face was hidden from Tommy, but he could see
Tibault's face. And he could hear.

They were not talking, but there was a sound between them. A warm and
contented sound like the murmur of giant bees in a hollow tree--a
golden, musical rumble, deep-throated, that came from Tibault's lips and
was answered by hers--a golden purr.

Tommy found himself back in the drawing-room, shaking hands with Mrs.
Culverin, who said, frankly, that she had seldom seen him look so pale.

The first two courses of the dinner passed Tommy like dreams, but Mrs.
Dingle's cellar was notable, and by the middle of the meat course, he
began to come to himself. He had only one resolve now.

For the next few moments he tried desperately to break into the
conversation, but Mrs. Dingle was talking, and even Gabriel will have a
time interrupting Mrs. Dingle. At last, though, she paused for breath
and Tommy saw his chance.

"Speaking of that," said Tommy, piercingly, without knowing in the least
what he was referring to, "Speaking of that----"

"As I was saying," said Professor Tatto. But Tommy would not yield. The
plates were being taken away. It was time for salad.

"Speaking of that," he said again, so loudly and strangely that Mrs.
Culverin jumped and an awkward hush fell over the table. "Strange,
isn't it, how often fact copies fiction?" There, he was started. His
voice rose even higher. "Why, only to-day I was strolling through----"
and, word for word, he repeated his lesson. He could see Tibault's eyes
glowing at him, as he described the funeral. He could see the Princess,
tense.

He could not have said what he had expected might happen when he came to
the end; but it was not bored silence, everywhere, to be followed by
Mrs. Dingle's acrid, "Well, Tommy, is that _quite_ all?"

He slumped back in his chair, sick at heart. He was a fool and his last
resource had failed. Dimly he heard his aunt's voice, saying, "Well,
then----" and realized that she was about to make the fatal
announcement.

But just then Monsieur Tibault spoke.

"One moment, Mrs. Dingle," he said, with extreme politeness, and she was
silent. He turned to Tommy.

"You are--positive, I suppose, of what you saw this afternoon, Brooks?"
he said, in tones of light mockery.

"Absolutely," said Tommy sullenly. "Do you think I'd----"

"Oh, no, no, no," Monsieur Tibault waved the implication aside,
"but--such an interesting story--one likes to be sure of the
details--and, of course, you _are_ sure--_quite_ sure--that the kind of
crown you describe was on the coffin?"

"Of course," said Tommy, wondering, "but----"

"Then I'm the King of the Cats!" cried Monsieur Tibault in a voice of
thunder, and, even as he cried it, the house-lights blinked--there was
the soft thud of an explosion that seemed muffled in cotton-wool from
the minstrel gallery--and the scene was lit for a second by an
obliterating and painful burst of light that vanished in an instant and
was succeeded by heavy, blinding clouds of white, pungent smoke.

"Oh, those _horrid_ photographers," came Mrs. Dingle's voice in a
melodious wail. "I _told_ them not to take the flashlight picture till
dinner was over, and now they've taken it _just_ as I was nibbling
lettuce!"

Someone tittered a little nervously. Someone coughed. Then, gradually
the veils of smoke dislimned and the green-and-black spots in front of
Tommy's eyes died away.

They were blinking at each other like people who have just come out of a
cave into brilliant sun. Even yet their eyes stung with the fierceness
of that abrupt illumination and Tommy found it hard to make out the
faces across the table from him.

Mrs. Dingle took command of the half-blinded company with her accustomed
poise. She rose, glass in hand. "And now, dear friends," she said in a
clear voice, "I'm sure all of us are very happy to----" Then she
stopped, open-mouthed, an expression of incredulous horror on her
features. The lifted glass began to spill its contents on the tablecloth
in a little stream of amber. As she spoke, she had turned directly to
Monsieur Tibault's place at the table--and Monsieur Tibault was no
longer there.

Some say there was a bursting flash of fire that disappeared up the
chimney--some say it was a giant cat that leaped through the window at a
bound, without breaking the glass. Professor Tatto puts it down to a
mysterious chemical disturbance operating only over M. Tibault's chair.
The butler, who is pious, believes the devil in person flew away with
him, and Mrs. Dingle hesitates between witchcraft and a malicious
ectoplasm dematerializing on the wrong cosmic plane. But be that as it
may, one thing is certain--in the instant of fictive darkness which
followed the glare of the flashlight, Monsieur Tibault, the great
conductor, disappeared forever from mortal sight, tail and all.

Mrs. Culverin swears he was an international burglar and that she was
just about to unmask him, when he slipped away under cover of the
flashlight smoke, but no one else who sat at that historic dinner-table
believes her. No, there are no sound explanations, but Tommy thinks he
knows, and he will never be able to pass a cat again without wondering.

Mrs. Tommy is quite of her husband's mind regarding cats--she was
Gretchen Woolwine, of Chicago--for Tommy told her his whole story, and
while she doesn't believe a great deal of it, there is no doubt in her
heart that one person concerned in the affair was a _perfect_ cat.
Doubtless it would have been more romantic to relate how Tommy's daring
finally won him his Princess--but, unfortunately, it would not be
veracious. For the Princess Vivrakanarda, also, is with us no longer.
Her nerves, shattered by the spectacular denouement of Mrs. Dingle's
dinner, required a sea-voyage, and from that voyage she has never
returned to America.

Of course, there are the usual stories--one hears of her, a nun in a
Siamese convent, or a masked dancer at Le Jardin de ma Soeur--one hears
that she has been murdered in Patagonia or married in Trebizond--but,
as far as can be ascertained, not one of these gaudy fables has the
slightest basis of fact. I believe that Tommy, in his heart of hearts,
is quite convinced that the sea-voyage was only a pretext, and that by
some unheard-of means, she has managed to rejoin the formidable Monsieur
Tibault, wherever in the world of the visible or the invisible he may
be--in fact, that in some ruined city or subterranean palace they reign
together now, King and Queen of all the mysterious Kingdom of Cats. But
that, of course, is quite impossible.



TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

Other than the addition of a missing period, minor variations in
spelling and punctuation have been preserved.



[End of The King of the Cats, by Stephen Vincent Benét]
